Title:
Large Language Models as Information Extractors in Healthcare

Abstract:
Large Language Models (LLMs) show strong potential for clinical informa-
tion extraction, however, electronic health records (EHR) often contain large
amounts of redundant or irrelevant text that confuse the LLM making it strug-
gle to reliably retrieve relevant information. Retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG) can mitigate this challenge by reducing the amount of context provided
to the LLM, although the most optimal approaches have not been explored.
We introduce a benchmark for evaluating and comparing retrieval methods
for EHR information extraction. Using the Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock
Early Management Bundle (SEP-1) from the Centers for Medicare and Medi-
caid Services (CMS) specifications manual, we generated 100 synthetic nee-
dles representing positive qualifiers across five clinically meaningful elements.
For each element, we randomly selected 10,000 patients from the MIMIC-III
dataset (461,290 total clinical notes) and inserted one synthetic needle per
patient to construct patient-level haystacks. We evaluated six retrieval strate-
gies and prompted the LLM using top-10 retrieved passages. We assess the
retrieval approaches against a baseline approach without RAG that uses all
the information within the context limit of the model. LLM responses were
generated using AWS Bedrock (DeepSeek-V3) and evaluated on classification
and extraction tasks. SPLADE achieved the highest top-k recall, while BM25
achieved the lowest. Retrieval effectiveness varied by clinical element, with
clinical trial queries achieving the highest recall and vasopressor queries the
lowest. Baseline performance indicated that longer context and higher top-k
retrieval reduced model accuracy, showcasing the need for retrieval. Overall,
our results demonstrate a strong positive correlation between retrieval qual-
ity and LLM accuracy, emphasizing that developing and improving retrieval
strategies can lead to more effective clinical information extraction.